70 NOTES

but on this occasion it was drawn up as below—

[1 l] [J Π] [J [1

D [1 [1 Ε] [J l]

t] [J [1 t] 1] Γ]
with light-armed troops (velites) between the maniples; the
velites could easily withdraw on the charge of the elephants‚
which would then naturally make for the open spaces and
pass through the Roman line without inflicting serious
damage.

554. haudquaquam turbatis: translate, ‘without throwing
into confusion . . . ’.

556. ab sinistro cornu ε for this use of ab cf. note on
α tergm, l. 117.

557. Numidas: Scipio had seen the value of Hannibal's
Numidian cavalry and had obtained large numbers of them.
vias patentes, the gaps between the Roman maniplos.

559. primos, predicative ; translate adverbially, ‘ in front.’

560. auxilia, object to instruxit understood.

562. circumdedit cornibus : cornibus dative after verb
compounded with a preposition ; ‘ he placed the cavalry on
the flanks.’

XXI

564. tubae, the long straight trumpet of the Roman army.

565. cecinerunt, lit. ‘sang‘, ‘rang out‚' so ‘gave the
sigual’. ccmo is used intransit. as here, or transit. with
siynum as object.

565. tantus . . . ut . . . verterentur, consecutive subj.

566. bestiarum, partit. genit.

568. elephantis, dative of advantage.

570. verterunt, subject is elephanti.

571. secunda acies, sc. Cartlzayinlensizmz.

573. et numero . . . et animo, ‘both . . . and': these are
abl. of respect: L. G. 121 (s). The victory was doubtless
largely due to the originality of the Roman general, who
nullified Hannibal's advantage in elephants by drawing up
his battle line on a new plan, and his advantage in light
cavalry by himself employing the same Numidian cavalry 111
still larger numbers.

580. Hannibal fugit: Hannibal knew that his life was
stilles value to Carthage, as the terror of his name might
enable him to secure easier ternis of peace.

581. 111 curia: notice the application of a Roman term to
a Carthaginian institution.

582. esse, ·' was ', ‘lay in '-

